.TH OOKCREATE 3 2013-10-03 "" "Ook Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ookcreate \- create a file to store a dataset in.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <ook.h>
.sp
.BI "struct ookfile* ookcreate(struct io " interface ", const char* " filename
.BI "                          const uint64_t " dims "[3], "
.BI "                          const size_t " bsize "[3], "
.BI "                          enum OOKTYPE " type ", size_t " components );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
ookcreate returns a
.IR struct\ ookfile ,
which is used in basically all other Ook function calls.  It allows read and
write access to a file.
.LP
The file is created by the call to
.BR ookcreate ().
.B Note
that the file will be truncated when opened!  Ook does not currently support
switching between reading and writing for a given file.  However, client code
may perform these in phases: e.g. all writing, then all reading, then close the
file.
.LP
The 
.I interface
option gives the IO interface to use; see
.BR io-interface(7).
.I filename
is the filename to read.  The desired number of voxels in the dataset must be
given in
.IR voxels .
.I bsize
is the desired size of the bricks in the volume.  Note this must make sense for
the given volume; one cannot have larger bricks than the volume itself.
.I type
is the primitive type of the data; Ook uses this and
.I components
to figure out how big each element is.
.LP
The Ook interface provides a bricked dataset, but the file this API creates is
.IR not
bricked.  By default, the created file will be a raw linear array with the X
dimension
changing fastest and the Z dimension changing slowest (i.e. the standard C
array ordering).  The
.BR io-interface(7)
can alter this layout, of course.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.BR ookcreate ()
returns a pointer to an opaque structure describing the file.  On
error, NULL is returned and
.I errno
is set appropriately.

.SH ERRORS
In general, an exhaustive listing is impossible;
.BR ookcreate ()
can fail for any of the reasons that
.IR interface 's
.I open
method can fail.  Errors specific to
.BR ookcreate ()
are listed here.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Brick size is larger than volume size, or
.I filename
was invalid.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
No memory available to create opaque structure.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR io-interface (7),
.BR ookread (3)
