.TH IO-INTERFACE 7 2013-10-03 "" "Ook Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
io-interface \- overview of how Ook's io-interfaces work
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <ook.h>
.sp
.BI "enum OOKMODE { OOK_RDONLY, OOK_RDWR };"
.BI "struct metadata {"
.BI "  uint64_t voxels[3];"
.BI "  size_t components;"
.BI "  size_t width;"
.BI "};"
.BI "typedef void* (" opener ")(const char* " fn ","
.BI "                       const enum OOKMODE " mode ","
.BI "                       struct metadata " md ");"
.BI "typedef int (" reader ")(void* " fd ", const off_t " offset ", "
.BI "                     const size_t " len ", void* " buf ");"
.BI "typedef int (" writer ")(void* " fd ", const off_t " offset ","
.BI "                     const size_t " len ", const void* " buf ");"
.BI "typedef int (" closer ")(void*" fd ");"
.BI "typedef void (" prealloc ")(void* " fd ", off_t " len ");"
.BI "struct io {"
.BI "  opener* open;"
.BI "  reader* read;"
.BI "  writer* write;"
.BI "  closer* close;"
.BI "  prealloc* preallocate;"
.BI "};"
.BI "extern struct io StdCIO;"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
An Ook io-interface provides a contiguous binary stream of the
underlying data it allows access to.
.LP
All data access in Ook goes through the functions pointed to by the
.IR "struct io"
members.  For simple raw data, these functions can be a thin forwarding layer
that just calls the underlying operating system APIs;
.I StdCIO
is exactly such a wrapper around C's
.IR fopen (3),
.IR fread (3),
.IR fclose (3),
etc. calls.  However, the interface could abstract a more complex
data acquisition scheme, such as a set of image files, a database
connection, or a server application that accesses data over a socket.
.LP
The abstraction that an
.I io-interface
provides is simply that of a large, contiguously-stored data file.  If
the resource cannot provide this abstraction, it is
not a good fit for Ook.
.LP
Offsets and lengths in the
.I io-interface
always refer to
.BR bytes ,
not elements.  During the time of an
.I opener
call, the interface is provided with some metadata describing the underlying
data type.  However, the intent is
that this is purely for verification and indexing purposes; many interfaces
will not need to store this information.

.SH FUNCTIONS
.LP
An Ook interface is comprised of a series of function pointers---there
is no data exposed.  Some functions are labelled
.BR Optional .
You may leave these functions NULL, at the cost of some functionality.  For
example, a missing
.B reader
implementation will cause the
.BR ookread (3)
call to fail.
.LP
The functions to implement are:
.TP
.BR opener .
.BR Required .
Provides access to the resource.  Implementations should allocate internal
resources here.  The function should verify that the resource exists during
this call.  the implementation
should verify that the given metadata matches what is available in the
resource, if possible.  The pointer returned is an opaque identifier;
Ook will pass it to the other
.I io-interface
functions (generally as the first argument), but otherwise does nothing to it.
Any internal state your interface needs should be contained in the memory
pointed to by the returned pointer.
.TP
.BR reader .
.BR Optional .
This is how data are accessed.  The first argument,
.IR fd ,
is (despite the name) not (necessarily) a file descriptor, but a pointer to
whatever your
.B opener
call returned.  You can assume this pointer is non-NULL.  The
.I offset
parameter gives the
.B byte
offset of the data to be read.
.I len
provides the number of
.B bytes
to read starting at
.IR offset .
.I buf
is where the data should be copied to.  You should assume
.I buf
is non-NULL and that it is large enough to hold 
.I len
bytes of data.

.TP
.BR writer .
.BR Optional .
The
.BR writer
function is the opposite of the
.B reader
function: it copies data from a user-supplied buffer into the resource provided
by the interface. Argument
.I fd
is a pointer to
whatever your
.B opener
call returned.  You can assume this pointer is non-NULL.  The
.I offset
parameter gives the
.B byte
offset of the data to be read.
.I len
provides the number of
.B bytes
to read starting at
.IR offset .
.I buf
is where the data are copied from.  You should assume that
.I buf
is non-NULL and points to valid memory at least
.I len
bytes long.
.TP
.BR closer .
.BR Required .
The
.B closer
function indicates access to the resource is no longer required.
Implementations should use this opportunity to finish pending writes and
deallocate any internally-defined memory.  It is implementation-defined whether
or not the
.B closer
function actually flushes data through to permanent storage.
.TP
.BR prealloc .
.BR Optional .
The
.B prealloc
function indicates that a range of data values will be written to by this
process.  Some implementations may want to use this information to optimize
writes.  Implementations may omit implementations for
.B prealloc
with no loss in functionality; it is provided purely for optimization purposes.

.SH "RETURN VALUES and ERRORS"
.LP
Each
.B io-interface
function has unique return value semantics.
.TP
.B opener
should return a pointer to internally-created state.  This pointer will be
passed to the other
.B io-interface
functions.  Should an error occur,
.B opener
functions should return NULL.
.TP
.B reader
should return 0 on success, and a non-zero error code on error.  Note that this
is
.BR not
the number of bytes read!  In Ook, a read is either complete or it fails;
partial reads should return an error code.
.TP
.B writer
should return 0 on success, and a non-zero error code on error.  Note that this
is
.BR not
the number of bytes written!  Partial writes should return an error code.
.TP
.B closer
should return 0 on success, and a non-zero error code on error.
.TP
.B prealloc
has no return value.

.SH EXAMPLE
.LP
Below is the complete implementation of the
.IR "StdCIO io-interface" .
This implementation assumes the file consists of a large, contiguous array of
bytes with no header or metadata information.  Thus, offsets translate directly
and the interface is essentially just a wrapper around the standard C library's
IO functions.

.nf
#include <errno.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include "io-interface.h"

static void*
stdc_open(const char* fn, const enum OOKMODE mode, struct metadata md)
{
  (void) md;
  const char* access = "rb";
  if(mode == OOK_RDWR) { access = "wb"; }
  FILE* fp = fopen(fn, access);

	if(NULL == fp) {
    errno = -EINVAL;
    return NULL;
	}
  return fp;
}

static int
stdc_read(void* fd, const off_t offset, const size_t len, void* buf)
{
  FILE* fp = (FILE*) fd;
  if(fseek(fp, offset, SEEK_SET) != 0) {
    return errno;
  }
  if(fread(buf, 1, len, fp) != len) {
    return errno;
  }
  return 0;
}

static int
stdc_write(void* fd, const off_t offset, const size_t len,
           const void* buf)
{
  FILE* fp = (FILE*) fd;
  if(fseek(fp, offset, SEEK_SET) != 0) {
    return errno;
  }
  if(fwrite(buf, 1, len, fp) != len) {
    return errno;
  }
  return 0;
}

static int
stdc_close(void* fd)
{
  FILE* fp = (FILE*) fd;
  if(fclose(fp) != 0) {
    return errno;
  }
  return 0;
}

struct io StdCIO = {
  .open = stdc_open,
  .read = stdc_read,
  .write = stdc_write,
  .close = stdc_close,
  .preallocate = NULL
};
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR ookread (3),
.BR ookcreate (3),
.BR ookbrick (3),
.BR ookwrite (3),
.BR ookclose (3),
.BR fopen (3),
.BR fread (3),
.BR fclose (3)
